The last introductory
part I want to cover here
is comparing reactive programs
and reactive programming
with another framework
called Java Reactive Streams.
Java Reactive Streams
was added to Java
starting in the Java 9 release.
And this is supported by
something called the Flow API.
So if you take a look
at Java 9, you'll
see that there are
these set of interfaces
that are part of the Flow
API in class Flow and so on.
This added support
for stream-oriented
publisher/subscriber,
or pub/sub, patterns.
And in particular, the
Reactive Streams model in Java
combines two
patterns that you're
undoubtedly familiar with
from the Gang of Four book.
We've covered them
before in other courses,
such as the Principles of--
the Foundations of Software
Engineering course.
One of the patterns is
the iterator pattern,
which applies a pull model where
applications, subscribers, pull
items from a source,
from a publisher.
And the other model is the
observer model, their observer
pattern, in which the publisher
pushes events or emits
events when an item is pushed
from a source to a subscriber.
So basically, these
are the two patterns
that are used very heavily
throughout the Reactive Streams
model that's part of Java 9.
Interestingly enough,
the Java Flow API
is really nothing more than
a bunch of interfaces--
like a publisher interface,
a subscriber interface,
a subscription interface,
a processor interface,
and so on--
that must be implemented
in order to give life
to this abstraction.
So it's actually not really
that usable in practice
as it comes out of
the box in Java 9.
Instead, it's really designed
as an interoperable foundation
that's implemented by other
popular reactive programming
frameworks, such
as RxJava and Akka.
So it's really not
actually something
that you can use without
doing a lot of programming.
And in fact, if you go and read
the documentation for Java 9
and look at the
examples, you'll see
that they end up either
just punting and saying,
go use our x Java.
Or they show you some convoluted
code you have to write.
So it's not really
something like
the parallel streams framework
or the completable futures
framework where it's
just falling off
the shelf fully baked.
You have to do a lot
of baking yourself.
Or you have to use these
other reactive programming
frameworks.
So here's a diagram
that tries to show
all the different pieces and
how they compare and contrast
with respect to different
Java programming
paradigms in terms
of the dimensions
we've been discussing.
So starting with
the old school way
of doing things, if you
look at classic Java objects
where you just make
method calls on them,
those are good examples
of synchronous calls.
You say-- if you have a
concurrent hash map, you say,
put or get.
And the objects that are
involved are single value.
You call put.
Or rather you call get.
And you get back a value.
You get back one value.
If you go up the box and look
at the multiple values axis
or multiple values
point on the y-axis,
you'll see that there
are some examples
like streams and
parallel streams
that provide
synchronous operations
with multiple values.
So you can think of
a stream as providing
a bunch of values, the data
elements in the stream.
But all the calls
are synchronous.
In other words, they block until
they're done with their work.
If you look on the
right-hand side,
you see that we have a new
dimension called asynchronous.
And completable futures, as
we'll describe initially,
are good examples of
asynchronous, single value
abstractions.
So they're asynchronous in that
things run in the background
without blocking the caller.
But they only return
a single value,
which is the result of
the completable future.
If you look in the upper
right-hand corner of the table,
you'll see that
other abstractions
like reactive streams, which we
just outlined, and Java streams
plus completable
futures gives us
a more powerful paradigm where
we have asynchronous operations
with multiple values.
All of the parts that we
have on the right-hand side
can be considered
reactive programming.
The stuff towards
the top is more
what we consider to be
full-fledged reactive
programming.
But be comfortable in
knowing that as we cover
these examples as we go
through this material,
we'll show you both the single
value completable futures
model as well as the multiple
values completable futures
model where we combine it with
streams, which is really cool
and in my mind gives you
many of the powerful features
that you get with
reactive streams
without all the
other complexities
you have to deal with.